An Operating System (OS) is a collection of software that manages computer hardware resources and provides common services for computer programs. When you start using a Computer System then it's the Operating System (OS) which acts as an interface between you and the computer hardware. The operating system is really a low level Software which is categorised as a System Software and supports a computer's basic functions, such as memory management, tasks scheduling and controlling peripherals etc.

This simple and easy tutorial will take you through step by step approach while learning Operating System concepts in detail.

What is Operating System?
An Operating System (OS) is an interface between a computer user and computer hardware. An operating system is a software which performs all the basic tasks like file management, memory management, process management, handling input and output, and controlling peripheral devices such as disk drives and printers.

Generally, a Computer System consists of the following components:

Computer Users are the users who use the overall computer system.
Application Softwares are the softwares which users use directly to perform different activities. These softwares are simple and easy to use like Browsers, Word, Excel, different Editors, Games etc. These are usually written in high-level languages, such as Python, Java and C++.
System Softwares are the softwares which are more complex in nature and they are more near to computer hardware. These software are usually written in low-level languages like assembly language and includes Operating Systems (Microsoft Windows, macOS, and Linux), Compiler, and Assembler etc.
Computer Hardware includes Monitor, Keyboard, CPU, Disks, Memory, etc.
So now let's put it in simple words:

If we consider a Computer Hardware is body of the Computer System, then we can say an Operating System is its soul which brings it alive ie. operational. We can never use a Computer System if it does not have an Operating System installed on it.
Operating System - Examples
There are plenty of Operating Systems available in the market which include paid and unpaid (Open Source). Following are the examples of the few most popular Operating Systems:

Windows: This is one of the most popular and commercial operating systems developed and marketed by Microsoft. It has different versions in the market like Windows 8, Windows 10 etc and most of them are paid.
Linux This is a Unix based and the most loved operating system first released on September 17, 1991 by Linus Torvalds. Today, it has 30+ variants available like Fedora, OpenSUSE, CentOS, UBuntu etc. Most of them are available free of charges though you can have their enterprise versions by paying a nominal license fee.
MacOS This is again a kind of Unix operating system developed and marketed by Apple Inc. since 2001.
iOS This is a mobile operating system created and developed by Apple Inc. exclusively for its mobile devices like iPhone and iPad etc.
Android This is a mobile Operating System based on a modified version of the Linux kernel and other open source software, designed primarily for touchscreen mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets.
Some other old but popular Operating Systems include Solaris, VMS, OS/400, AIX, z/OS, etc.

Operating System - Functions
To brief, Following are some of important functions of an operating System which we will look in more detail in upcoming chapters:

Process Management
I/O Device Management
File Management
Network Management
Main Memory Management
Secondary Storage Management
Security Management
Command Interpreter System
Control over system performance
Job Accounting
Error Detection and Correction
Coordination between other software and users
Many more other important tasks
Operating Systems - History
Operating systems have been evolving through the years. In the 1950s, computers were limited to running one program at a time like a calculator, but later in the following decades, computers began to include more and more software programs, sometimes called libraries, that formed the basis for today’s operating systems.

The first Operating System was created by General Motors in 1956 to run a single IBM mainframe computer, its name was the IBM 704. IBM was the first computer manufacturer to develop operating systems and distribute them in its computers in the 1960s.

There are few facts about Operating System evaluation:

Stanford Research Institute developed the oN-Line System (NLS) in the late 1960s, which was the first operating system that resembled the desktop operating system we use today.
Microsoft bought QDOS (Quick and Dirty Operating System) in 1981 and branded it as Microsoft Operating System (MS-DOS). As of 1994, Microsoft had stopped supporting MS-DOS.
Unix was developed in the mid-1960s by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, AT&T Bell Labs, and General Electric as a joint effort. Initially it was named MULTICS, which stands for Multiplexed Operating and Computing System.
FreeBSD is also a popular UNIX derivative, originating from the BSD project at Berkeley. All modern Macintosh computers run a modified version of FreeBSD (OS X).
Windows 95 is a consumer-oriented graphical user interface-based operating system built on top of MS-DOS. It was released on August 24, 1995 by Microsoft as part of its Windows 9x family of operating systems.
Solaris is a proprietary Unix operating system originally developed by Sun Microsystems in 1991. After the Sun acquisition by Oracle in 2010 it was renamed Oracle Solaris.
Why to Learn Operating System
If you are aspiring to become a Great Computer Programmer then it is highly recommended to understand how exactly an Operating System works inside out. This gives opportunity to understand how exactly data is saved in the disk, how different processes are created and scheduled to run by the CPU, how to interact with different I/O devices and ports.

There are various low level concepts which help a programmer to Design and Develop scalable softwares. Bottom line is without a good understanding of Operating System Concepts, it can't be assumed someone to be a good Computer Application Software developer, and even it is unimaginable imagine someone to become a System Software developer without knowing Operating System in-depth.

If you are a fresher and applying for a job in any standard company like Google, Microsoft, Amazon, IBM etc then it is very much possible that you will be asked questions related to Operating System concepts.

Target Audience
This tutorial has been prepared for the Computer Science Professionals and Students specially for BCA, MCA, B.Tech, M.Tech Engineering Students to help them understand the basic to advanced concepts related to an Operating System in general. Operating System is one of the core concepts in every University teaching Computer Science and this subject has a lot of weight from exams point of view.

Prerequisites
Before you start learning Operating System using this tutorial, we are making an assumption that you are already aware of Computer Fundaments like What is Computer Hardware, CPU, Primary Memory, Secondary Memory, Devices, Files etc. If you are not already aware of these concepts then it will be difficult to understand various concepts related to Operating System and so it is highly recommended to go through our Computer Fundamentals Tutorial before attempting to learn Operating System.
An Operating System (OS) is an interface between a computer user and computer hardware. An operating system is a software which performs all the basic tasks like file management, memory management, process management, handling input and output, and controlling peripheral devices such as disk drives and printers.

An operating system is software that enables applications to interact with a computer's hardware. The software that contains the core components of the operating system is called the kernel.

The primary purposes of an Operating System are to enable applications (spftwares) to interact with a computer's hardware and to manage a system's hardware and software resources.

Some popular Operating Systems include Linux Operating System, Windows Operating System, VMS, OS/400, AIX, z/OS, etc. Today, Operating systems is found almost in every device like mobile phones, personal computers, mainframe computers, automobiles, TV, Toys etc.

Definitions
We can have a number of definitions of an Operating System. Let's go through few of them:

An Operting System is the low-level software that supports a computer's basic functions, such as scheduling tasks and controlling peripherals.
We can refine this definition as follows:

An operating system is a program that acts as an interface between the user and the computer hardware and controls the execution of all kinds of programs.
Following is another definition taken from Wikipedia:

An operating system (OS) is system software that manages computer hardware, software resources, and provides common services for computer programs.
Architecture
We can draw a generic architecture diagram of an Operating System which is as follows:

Conceptual view of an Operating System
Operating System Generations
Operating systems have been evolving over the years. We can categorise this evaluation based on different generations which is briefed below:

0th Generation
The term 0th generation is used to refer to the period of development of computing when Charles Babbage invented the Analytical Engine and later John Atanasoff created a computer in 1940. The hardware component technology of this period was electronic vacuum tubes. There was no Operating System available for this generation computer and computer programs were written in machine language. This computers in this generation were inefficient and dependent on the varying competencies of the individual programmer as operators.

First Generation (1951-1956)
The first generation marked the beginning of commercial computing including the introduction of Eckert and Mauchly’s UNIVAC I in early 1951, and a bit later, the IBM 701.

System operation was performed with the help of expert operators and without the benefit of an operating system for a time though programs began to be written in higher level, procedure-oriented languages, and thus the operator’s routine expanded. Later mono-programmed operating system was developed, which eliminated some of the human intervention in running job and provided programmers with a number of desirable functions. These systems still continued to operate under the control of a human operator who used to follow a number of steps to execute a program. Programming language like FORTRAN was developed by John W. Backus in 1956.

Second Generation (1956-1964)
The second generation of computer hardware was most notably characterised by transistors replacing vacuum tubes as the hardware component technology. The first operating system GMOS was developed by the IBM computer. GMOS was based on single stream batch processing system, because it collects all similar jobs in groups or batches and then submits the jobs to the operating system using a punch card to complete all jobs in a machine. Operating system is cleaned after completing one job and then continues to read and initiates the next job in punch card.

Researchers began to experiment with multiprogramming and multiprocessing in their computing services called the time-sharing system. A noteworthy example is the Compatible Time Sharing System (CTSS), developed at MIT during the early 1960s.

Third Generation (1964-1979)
The third generation officially began in April 1964 with IBM’s announcement of its System/360 family of computers. Hardware technology began to use integrated circuits (ICs) which yielded significant advantages in both speed and economy.

Operating system development continued with the introduction and widespread adoption of multiprogramming. The idea of taking fuller advantage of the computer’s data channel I/O capabilities continued to develop.

Another progress which leads to developing of personal computers in fourth generation is a new development of minicomputers with DEC PDP-1. The third generation was an exciting time, indeed, for the development of both computer hardware and the accompanying operating system.

Fourth Generation (1979 – Present)
The fourth generation is characterised by the appearance of the personal computer and the workstation. The component technology of the third generation, was replaced by very large scale integration (VLSI). Many Operating Systems which we are using today like Windows, Linux, MacOS etc developed in the fourth generation.

Following are some of important functions of an operating System.

Memory Management
Processor Management
Device Management
File Management
Network Management
Security
Control over system performance
Job accounting
Error detecting aids
Coordination between other software and users
Memory Management
Memory management refers to management of Primary Memory or Main Memory. Main memory is a large array of words or bytes where each word or byte has its own address.

Main memory provides a fast storage that can be accessed directly by the CPU. For a program to be executed, it must in the main memory. An Operating System does the following activities for memory management −

Keeps tracks of primary memory, i.e., what part of it are in use by whom, what part are not in use.

In multiprogramming, the OS decides which process will get memory when and how much.

Allocates the memory when a process requests it to do so.

De-allocates the memory when a process no longer needs it or has been terminated.

Processor Management
In multiprogramming environment, the OS decides which process gets the processor when and for how much time. This function is called process scheduling. An Operating System does the following activities for processor management −

Keeps tracks of processor and status of process. The program responsible for this task is known as traffic controller.

Allocates the processor (CPU) to a process.

De-allocates processor when a process is no longer required.

Device Management
An Operating System manages device communication via their respective drivers. It does the following activities for device management −

Keeps tracks of all devices. Program responsible for this task is known as the I/O controller.

Decides which process gets the device when and for how much time.

Allocates the device in the efficient way.

De-allocates devices.

File Management
A file system is normally organized into directories for easy navigation and usage. These directories may contain files and other directions.

An Operating System does the following activities for file management −

Keeps track of information, location, uses, status etc. The collective facilities are often known as file system.

Decides who gets the resources.

Allocates the resources.

De-allocates the resources.

Other Important Activities
Following are some of the important activities that an Operating System performs −

Security − By means of password and similar other techniques, it prevents unauthorized access to programs and data.

Control over system performance − Recording delays between request for a service and response from the system.

Job accounting − Keeping track of time and resources used by various jobs and users.

Error detecting aids − Production of dumps, traces, error messages, and other debugging and error detecting aids.

Coordination between other softwares and users − Coordination and assignment of compilers, interpreters, assemblers and other software to the various users of the computer systems.